# Ag Expo High Tunnel Session 2013

### High Tunnel Economics

* market advantage, price premiums, high yield/quality, year round income
* make records. seperate them by crop
* crop enterprise budget: direct, overhead costs, depreciation of poly/hoop (depeding on loan term), marketing cost
* need use for records. if not going to use it then not likely to keep it going
* crop plan, yields/revenue, direct/general labor, costs
* tomato outreach: many were new. lost money often but some did really well.
* once become better then labor efficiency becomes the issue to work on
* hoophouses for health / mifma.org
* doing record keeping research. can sign up

### High Tunnels at River Root Farm

* 12 tillable acres
* mix of movable and fixed greenhouses
* 4 season tools - movable hoop coop
* why: transform food industry
* right stuff for right time of year: low tunnels, catapillar, unheated, heated
* low tunnels about 0.13/sq ft
* any cover is better than no cover
* barrier to pest
* catapillar - 1.78/sqft
* question is how long stuff will last. what is best use of space. can you get into dec outside the big tunnels and then late winter with full buildings
* gothic way to go for snow loads
* mix of fixed and movable
* vtrack is easy to move
* do wind break side and roll up vs drop down
* crops: multiple harvest, thawing/freezing, temp hardy
* start with spinach. lettuce mix / mesclun
* no problem with heaving and movable structures
* hoophouse.msu.edu for planting schedule
* work being done on structures that move in 4 directions and self level

### Soil Fertility

* living / not living. some will change some won't naturally/management
* soil texture / oneplan.org
* soils.usda.gov/education/facts/soil.html
* high tunnels: set configuration, diff temp/moisture profiles vs outside
* no off-season and short rotations
* investing in that sq footage by putting a house on it
* 50% listed problem or uncertain. hortscience 45:1534 trends in soil quality
* salinity a potential issue
* less structure/organic. more compaction, salt, imbalances, disease buildup
* tillage: loss of organic matter, setup for compaction
* loss of organic matter major cause for soil health decline
* multiple layors. can be under and cause root to not be able to grow deep
* compaction reduces pore size and number
* irrigation frequency affects root growth and salt buildup
* fertility plan
* monitor, rotate and amend, uncover/fallow, move/containerize?
* track nutrient flows. crop uptake / runoff
* nutrient management plan
* ohio soil health card
* containers can help
* hcs.osu.edu/vpslab
* drainage is important around tunnel
* annual soil test. 2 years at most
* compost based on what crop needs. based on tonnage
* fallow/uncover or flood tunnel for salt movement
* test water for salt content
* permanent raised beds so can replace/choose media or change configuration/rotations